Revision (#97)
aaronpeikert/bayes-prereg: manuscript.Rmd

One goal of preregistration that has received widespread attention is to clearly distinguish confirmatory from exploratory research [@mellorEasyPreregistrationWill2018; @nosekPreregistrationRevolution2018; @wagenmakersAgendaPurelyConfirmatory2012; @simmonsPreregistrationWhyHow2021; @bakkerEnsuringQualitySpecificity2020].
In such a narrative, preregistration is justified by a confirmatory research agenda.
However, two problems become apparent under closer inspection.

> First, many researchers do not subscribe to a purely confirmatory research agenda [@tukeyExploratoryDataAnalysis1972; @baumeisterChartingFutureSocial2016; @finkelReplicabilityOtherFeatures2017].

Reviewer: Im Prinzip auch Brandmaier et al., 2013 :-)

Brandmaier, A. M., von Oertzen, T., McArdle, J. J., & Lindenberger, U. (2013). Structural equation model trees. Psychological Methods, 18(1), 71–86. [https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030001](https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/a0030001)

Author: 2508262706df7b88e4f4fdcc8955f6dece347bf5

<!---outline-structure--->
To form such an objective for preregistration, we first introduce some tools of Bayesian philosophy of science and map the exploration/confirmation distinction onto a dimensional quantity we call "theoretical risk" [a term borrowed from @meehlTheoreticalRisksTabular1978, but formalized as the probability of proving a hypothesis wrong if it does not hold].

We are interested in why preregistrations should change researchers' evaluation of evidence.
Applying a Bayesian framework allows us to investigate our research question most straightforwardly. 
Specifically, it allows us to model changes in subjective degrees of belief due to preregistration or, more simply, "persuasion".
Please note that our decision to adopt a Bayesian philosophy of science does not make assumptions about the statistical methods researchers use.
In fact, this conceptualization is intentionally as minimal as possible to be compatible with a wide range of philosophies of science and statistical methods researchers might subscribe to.

> However, we should note that Popperians would be appalled that we are content with positive inductive inferences (but we dislike "failing to disprove" too much to give it up), and Neopopperians would flinch that we assign probabilities to beliefs (we are fond of calculating things).

Reviewer: I don't understand "we dislike it too much to give it up". I would understand if you say "we _like_ it too much to give it up" or the opposite ("we dislike it too much to keep it").

Author: True!

```suggestion
However, we should note that Popperians would be appalled that we are content with positive inductive inferences (but we dislike "failing to disprove" too much), and Neopopperians would flinch that we assign probabilities to beliefs (we are fond of calculating things).
```

Author: ```suggestion
However, we should note that Popperians would be appalled that we are content with positive inductive inferences (but we regard "failing to disprove" as too limited), and Neopopperians would flinch that we assign probabilities to beliefs (we are fond of calculating things).
```

\end{equation}

The posterior probability $P(H|E)$ is of great relevance since it is often used directly or indirectly as a measure of confirmation of a hypothesis.

> In the tradition of Carnap, in its direct use, it is called confirmation as firmness; in its relation to the a priori probability $P(H)$, it is called _increase in firmness_ [@carnapLogicalFoundationsProbability1950, preface to the 1962 edition].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the tradition of Carnap, in its direct use, it is called _confirmation as firmness_; in its relation to the a priori probability $P(H)$, it is called _increase in firmness_ [@carnapLogicalFoundationsProbability1950, preface to the 1962 edition].
```

We concentrate on the posterior probability because of its simplicity but take it only as one example of a possible measure.

> In reality, surely researchers differ in what function they apply to judge evidence and it is often most fruitful to compare more than two competing hypotheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In reality, researchers surely differ in what function they apply to judge evidence and it is often most fruitful to compare more than two competing hypotheses.
```

We call this probability of detecting evidence, given that the hypothesis holds "detectability."
Consequently, researchers should ensure that their study design allows them to find evidence for their hypothesis, in case it is true.
When applied strictly within the bounds of null hypothesis testing, detectability is equivalent to power (or the complement of type-II error rate).
However, while detectability is of great importance for study design, it is not directly relevant to what a preregistration is comunicating to other researchers.

> However, we latter discuss how issues detectability must be considered for the issue of preregistration.

Reviewer: There is two "howevers" in the two sentences. Also, I don't understand the second sentence.
Do you mean:
```suggestion
We later discuss how issues of detectability must be considered in a preregistration.
```

Let us note some interesting properties of theoretical risk $P(\neg{}E|\neg{}H)$.
First, increasing theoretical risk leads to higher posterior probability $P(H|E)$, our objective.
Second, if the theoretical risk is smaller than detectability $P(E|H)$ it follows that the posterior probability must decrease when observing the evidence.
If detectability exceeds theoretical risk, the evidence is less likely under the theory than it is when the theory does not hold (the inverse of statistical relevancy).
Third, if the theoretical risk equals zero, then posterior probability is at best equal to prior probability but only if detectability is perfect ($P(H|E)$ = 1).
In other words, observing a sure fact does not lend credence to a hypothesis.

The last statement sounds like a truism but is directly related to Popper's seminal criterion of demarcation.
He stated that if it is impossible to prove that a hypothesis is false ($P(\neg{}E|\neg{}H) = 0$, theoretical risk is zero), it cannot be considered a scientific hypothesis [@popperLogicScientificDiscovery2002, p. 18].

> We note these relations to underline that the Bayesian rationale we apply here is able to reconstruct many commonly held views on riskiness and epistemic value (but Popper would disagree with attaching any form of believe in $H$ on the basis of evidence beyond failing to disprove it).

Author: ```suggestion
We note these relations to underline that the Bayesian rationale we apply here is able to reconstruct many commonly held views on riskiness and epistemic value (but we of course differ from Popper on the central issue of induction in science).
```

Let us note some interesting properties of theoretical risk $P(\neg{}E|\neg{}H)$.
First, increasing theoretical risk leads to higher posterior probability $P(H|E)$, our objective.
Second, if the theoretical risk is smaller than detectability $P(E|H)$ it follows that the posterior probability must decrease when observing the evidence.
If detectability exceeds theoretical risk, the evidence is less likely under the theory than it is when the theory does not hold (the inverse of statistical relevancy).
Third, if the theoretical risk equals zero, then posterior probability is at best equal to prior probability but only if detectability is perfect ($P(H|E)$ = 1).
In other words, observing a sure fact does not lend credence to a hypothesis.

The last statement sounds like a truism but is directly related to Popper's seminal criterion of demarcation.
He stated that if it is impossible to prove that a hypothesis is false ($P(\neg{}E|\neg{}H) = 0$, theoretical risk is zero), it cannot be considered a scientific hypothesis [@popperLogicScientificDiscovery2002, p. 18].

> We note these relations to underline that the Bayesian rationale we apply here is able to reconstruct many commonly held views on riskiness and epistemic value (but we of course differ from Popper on the central issue of induction in science).

Reviewer: Bin mir nicht sicher, was mit "issue" gemeint ist. Vielleicht "role"?

```suggestion
We note these relations to underline that the Bayesian rationale we apply here is able to reconstruct many commonly held views on riskiness and epistemic value (but we of course differ from Popper on the central role of induction in science).
```

Second, available resources limit theoretical risk.
Increasing theoretical risk $P(\neg{}E|\neg{}H)$ will usually decrease detectability $P(E|H)$ unless more resources are invested.
This is similar to the well known tradeoff between type-I error rate and statistical power.
Tasking preregistration with an increase in theoretical risk makes it difficult to balance this trade-off.
Mindlessly maximizing theoretical risk would either never produce evidence or require huge amounts of resources.

> As noted before, we strive for high detectability and high theoretical risk.

Author: ```suggestion
As noted before, we strive for high detectability and high theoretical risk in planning, conducting, and analyzing studies.
```

Researchers who choose a smaller type-I error rate can be more sure of their results, if significant, because the theoretical risk is higher.
However, this connection should not be overinterpreted for two reasons.
First, according to most interpretations of null hypothesis testing, the absence of a significant result should not generally be interpreted as evidence against the hypothesis [@mayoStatisticalInferenceSevere2018, 5.3].
Second, the research hypothesis seldomly equals the statistical alternative-hypothesis (most research hypothesis are more specific then "any value except zero").
In fact, it is entirely possible to assume the null hypothesis as a research hypothesis, as is commonly done in e.g., structural equation modelling, where the roles of detectability, theoretical risk and type-I/II error rate switch.
We argue that theoretical risk (and hence its complement, $P(E|\neg{}H)$) also encompasses factors outside the statistical realm, most notably the study design and broader analytical strategies.

> Type-I error rate is the property of a statistical test under some assumptions, whereas theoretical risk is a researchers believe.

Author: ```suggestion
Type-I error rate is the property of a statistical test under some assumptions, whereas theoretical risk is a researchers' believe.
```
Apostroph right?

One may take such theoretical properties as a first starting point to form a substantive belief but surely researchers ought to take other factors into consideration.

> For example, if a researcher believes that there might be confounding variables at play for the relation between two variables, this should decrease theorethical risk; after all they might find an association purely on account of the confounders.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if a researcher believes that there might be confounding variables at play for the relation between two variables, this should decrease theorethical risk; after all they might find an association purely on account of the confounders. [@fiedlerWhatConstitutesStrong2017]
```

To further reduce the uncertainty about theoretical risk, researchers must therefore publish code and ideally data.
After all, computational reproducibility is only possible if the data analytic procedure was communicated clearly enough to allow others to retrace the computational steps [@peikertReproducibleDataAnalysis2021].

In any case, a well-written preregistration should aim to reduce the uncertainty about the theoretical risk and hence increase the persuasiveness of evidence.
Therefore, a study that perfectly adhered to its preregistration will resemble the solid line in Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}.
Crucially, perfect means here that the theoretical risk can be judged with low uncertainty, not that the theoretical risk is necessarily high.

# Hacking, harking, and other harms

The importance of distinguishing between low and highly uncertain theoretical risk becomes perhaps clearer if we consider couple of hypothetical cases.

1. We know with absolute certainty that the results are hacked.

> 2. The hypothesis was picked to explain the results.

Author: Solved in 8729e23166b058cbc20e62030fd13de61926eecc

4. The results are obtained by planned exploration.
5. The results are obtained by unplanned exploration.

In case 1, there is no theoretical risk ($P(\neg{}E|\neg{}H) = 0$).
If we know that no matter what, the results engineered to support the hypothesis, there is no reason to collect data.
Case 2 has a similar problem.
After all, the hypothesis that it had to happen the way it did happen is irrefutable.
In fact, both cases should be problematic to anyone who subscribes to the statistical relevancy condition because if we choose the hypothesis in accordance with the data or vice versa, without restrictions, they are not related anymore (i.e., observing the data does not tell us anything about the hypothesis and the other way around).
Case 3, is different since here the theoretical risk is not necessarily low but simply uncertain and perhaps represented by the dotted line in Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}.
In case 4, the theoretical risk is neither zero (unless the researcher plans to do everything in their power to obtain favourable results, then we have a particular instance case of 1) nor high (that is what makes it exploratory).

> However, we can use statistical properties, simulation or resampling methods, together with scientific reasoning, to get a reasonably certain evaluation of the theoretical risk and hence are in a somewhat favourable position (i.e., close to the solid line in n Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}).

Author: ```suggestion
However, we can take advantage of computational reproducibility, use statistical properties, simulation or resampling methods, together with scientific reasoning, to get a reasonably certain evaluation of the theoretical risk and hence are in a somewhat favourable position (i.e., close to the solid line in n Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}).
```

They still might be uncertain about the actual theoretical risk the authors took, but to a much smaller extent than if the study would not have been preregistered.

The remaining sources of uncertainty might be unfamiliarity with statistical methods or experimental paradigms used, the probability of an implementation error in the statistical analyses, a bug in the software used for analyses, etc.
To further reduce the uncertainty about theoretical risk, researchers must therefore publish code and ideally data.
After all, computational reproducibility is only possible if the data analytic procedure was communicated clearly enough to allow others to retrace the computational steps [@peikertReproducibleDataAnalysis2021].

In any case, a well-written preregistration should aim to reduce the uncertainty about the theoretical risk and hence increase the persuasiveness of evidence.
Therefore, a study that perfectly adhered to its preregistration will resemble the solid line in Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}.
Crucially, perfect means here that the theoretical risk can be judged with low uncertainty, not that the theoretical risk is necessarily high.

> # Hacking, harking, and other harms

Reviewer 2: I really like those examples!!!
One thing where I am not completely shure is Andreas comment - I would agree with the intuition that the way it is currently phrased, the first example does not have zero, but low theoretical risk.

The importance of distinguishing between low and highly uncertain theoretical risk becomes perhaps clearer if we consider a few hypothetical cases for illustration.

> 1. We know with absolute certainty that reported results came about by p-hacking.

Author: ```suggestion
1. We know with absolute certainty that researchers will revert to p-hacking to create evidence that is favorable for the theory.
```

Case 3, is different since here the theoretical risk is not necessarily low but simply uncertain (and perhaps best represented by the dotted line in Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}).
In case 4, the theoretical risk is neither zero (unless the researcher plans to do run variations of analyses until a favourable outcome is obtained, then we have a particular instance case of 1) nor high (as this is the nature of exploratory approaches).
However, we can take advantage of computational reproducibility, use statistical properties, simulation or resampling methods, together with scientific reasoning, to get a reasonably certain evaluation of the theoretical risk and hence are in a somewhat favourable position (i.e., close to the solid line in n Figure \ref{fig:posterior}/\ref{fig:other-measures}).
This favorable position leads us to recommend preregistration of exploratory studies.
Case 5 shares the neither zero nor high theoretical risk of case 4 but has additional uncertainty about how much exploration was going on (how hard did researcher try to come up with favourable results).

> Its low theoretical risk combined with high uncertainty about it, make it difficult to produce compelling evidence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its low \textbf{and uncertain} theoretical risk make it difficult to produce compelling evidence.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Its low *and uncertain* theoretical risk make it difficult to produce compelling evidence.
```

Journal editors could encourage theoretical developments that allow for precise predictions that will be tested by other researchers and be willing to accept registered reports [@friedLackTheoryBuilding2020; @friedTheoriesModelsWhat2020; @vanrooijTheoryDevelopmentRequires2020; @vanrooijTheoryTestHow2021].
Funding agencies should demand an explicit statement about theoretical risk in relation to detectability and must be willing to provide the necessary resources to reach adequate levels of both [@kooleRewardingReplicationsSure2012].

> Theoretical risk may conceptually be related to the conceptual framework of "severity" [@mayoStatisticalInferenceSevere2018; @mayoErrorStatistics2011].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Theoretical risk may conceptually be related to the framework of "severity" [@mayoStatisticalInferenceSevere2018; @mayoErrorStatistics2011].
```

Parts of the process left unspecified imply uncertainty, which preregistration should reduce.
However, specifying procedures that can be expected to fail will lead to deviation and, subsequently, to larger uncertainty.

Our emphasis on transparency echoes other justifications of preregistration, especially @lakensValuePreregistrationPsychological2019's, although we come from a very different philosophical starting point.
What we hope to contribute, however, is a rationale that more stringently deals with the issues of exploration and confirmation, post-hoc changes, as well as subjective evaluations of evidence.
We find it difficult to content ourselves with vague terms like "control" or "transparency" if they ultimately remain unconnected to how much researchers believe in a theory.

> In our framework, researchers can input what they assume other researchers think and calculate what their actions, be it the preregistration itself or later deviations, may have on their readers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our framework, researchers can input what they assume other researchers think and calculate what their actions, be it the preregistration itself or later deviations, may have on their readers.
```
```suggestion
Within our framework, researchers have the ability to input their assumptions regarding the perspectives of other researchers and calculate the potential impact of their actions on their readership, no matter whether these actions be related to the preregistration itself or subsequent deviations from it, 
```

Author: ```suggestion
Within our framework, researchers have the ability to input their assumptions regarding the perspectives of other researchers and calculate the potential impact of their actions on their readership, whether these actions relate to study design to the preregistration itself or subsequent deviations from it.
```

> We put subjective evaluations at the centre of our consideration; we deal explicitly with researchers who are proponents of some theory (they have higher priors), researchers who suspect confounding variables (they have lower theoretical risk), or those who remain doubtful if everything relevant was reported (they have higher uncertainty about theoretical risk) or even those who place greater value on incongruent evidence then others (they differ in their confirmation function).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We put subjective evaluations at the centre of our consideration; we deal explicitly with researchers who are proponents of some theory (they have higher priors for the theory being true), researchers who suspect confounding variables (they assume lower theoretical risk), or those who remain doubtful if everything relevant was reported (they have higher uncertainty about theoretical risk) or even those who place greater value on incongruent evidence then others (they differ in their confirmation function).
```

> We, therefore, hope to not only provide a rationale for preregistration for those who subscribe to a Bayesian philosophy of science but also a tool to navigate the complicated questions that arise in the practice of preregistration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We, therefore, hope to not only provide a rationale for preregistration for those who subscribe to a Bayesian philosophy of science but also a framework to navigate the complicated questions that arise in the practice of preregistration.
```

Reviewer: it's not really a tool (yet... :-) )

> However, approaching the evaluation of evidence using a Bayesian formalism is far from novel [e.g., @kuklaClinicalStatisticalTheory1990 @fiedlerWhatConstitutesStrong2017;@sprengerBayesianPhilosophyScience2019].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, approaching the evaluation of evidence using a Bayesian formalism is far from novel [e.g., @kuklaClinicalStatisticalTheory1990 @fiedlerWhatConstitutesStrong2017;@sprengerBayesianPhilosophyScience2019].
```

To our knowledge, it was not yet applied to the problem of preregistration.
However, @oberauerAddressingTheoryCrisis2019 made use of the formalism to model the relation between theory, hypothesis, and evidence.

> In the wake of this conceptualization, they discussed the usefulness of preregistration, though without applying the formalism there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of this conceptualization, they discussed the usefulness of preregistration, though without applying the formalism there.
```

> Most interestingly, they are rather critical of the idea that preregistration has tangible benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most importantly, they are rather critical of the idea that preregistration has tangible benefits.
```

Instead, they prefer multiverse analyses but contend that those could be preregistered if one fancies it.
Their reasoning is based on two intuitions about what should *not* influence the evaluation of evidence: temporal order and the mental state of the originator.
For one, they disregard the temporal order a bit too hastily, as it is a long-standing issue in Bayesian philosophy of science known as the "problem of old evidence" [@chiharaProblemsBayesianConfirmation1987].
However, we agree that the information flow matters for preregistration, not the temporal order.

> For the other, we find that the mental state of the originator does matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the other, we argue that the mental state of the originator does matter.
```

Suppose there are $k = 1, 2, \ldots, K$ ways to analyze data.
Where each $k$ has a $P(E_k | \neg H) > 0$.
If they intend to try each way after another but happen to be "lucky" on the first try and stop, should we then apply $P(\neg E| \neg H) = P(\neg E_1 | \neg H)$ or $P(\neg E| \neg H) = \prod_{k=1}^K P(\neg E_k | \neg H)$?
We think the latter.

Whatever the difference in evaluating preregistration as a tool, maybe conceptually more profound is that @oberauerAddressingTheoryCrisis2019 conceptualizes "discovery-oriented research" differently than we do "exploratory".

> They assume the same theoretical risk ($P(\neg E| \neg H) = .05$) and detectability ($P(E| H)) = .8$) in their calculation example as we but assign different prior probabilities, namely $.06$ for discovery versus $.6$ for theory testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They assume the same theoretical risk ($P(\neg E| \neg H) = .05$) and detectability ($P(E| H)) = .8$) in their calculation example as we do but assign different prior probabilities, namely $.06$ for discovery versus $.6$ for theory testing.
```

> They then conclude that discovery-oriented researcher requires a much lower type-I error rate to control false positive in light of the low prior probability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, they conclude that discovery-oriented researcher requires a much lower type-I error rate to control false positive in light of the low prior probability.
```

This runs counter to our definition of exploratory research having low theoretical risk.
Of course, we agree that low priors require more persuasive evidence; our disagreement, therefore, lies mainly in terminology.
They imagine discovery-oriented researchers to conduct experiments where they have low expectations that they obtain positive evidence ($.06 \cdot .8 + .94 \cdot .05 = 0.095$), but if they do, it raises the posterior significantly (from $.06$ to $.51$)
In our view, researchers who set out to explore a data set often find "something" (due to low $P(\neg E| \neg H)$); therefore, it should only slightly raise your posterior if they do.
On a substantive matter, we believe both kinds of research are common in psychology.
It is, therefore, mostly a disagreement on terminology.

> This disagreement only highlights why using a mathematical framework to investigate such things is so fruitful because we can clearly see where and how we differ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This disagreement only highlights why using a mathematical framework to investigate such things is so useful and ultimately indispensable because we can clearly see where and how we differ in our reasoning.
```

Parts of the process left unspecified imply uncertainty, which preregistration should reduce.
However, specifying procedures that can be expected to fail will lead to deviation and, subsequently, to larger uncertainty.

Our emphasis on transparency aligns with other justifications of preregistration, especially those put forth by @lakensValuePreregistrationPsychological2019's, although based on quite different philosophical foundations.
Our goal is to contribute a rationale that more comprehensively captures the spectrum of exploration and confirmation in relation to preregistrations, post-hoc changes of preregistrations, and subjective evaluations of evidence.
We find it difficult to content ourselves with vague terms like "control" or "transparency" if they ultimately remain unconnected to how much researchers believe in a theory.
Within our framework, researchers have the ability to input their assumptions regarding the perspectives of other researchers and calculate the potential impact of their actions on their readership, whether these actions relate to study design, to the preregistration itself, or subsequent deviations from it.

> We put subjective evaluations at the centre of our consideration; we deal explicitly with researchers who are proponents of some theory (they have higher priors for the theory being true), researchers who suspect confounding variables (they assume lower theoretical risk), or those who remain doubtful if everything relevant was reported (they have higher uncertainty about theoretical risk) or even those who place greater value on incongruent evidence then others (they differ in their confirmation function).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We put subjective evaluations at the centre of our considerations; we deal explicitly with researchers who are proponents of some theory (they have higher priors for the theory being true), researchers who suspect confounding variables (they assume lower theoretical risk), or those who remain doubtful if everything relevant was reported (they have higher uncertainty about theoretical risk) or even those who place greater value on incongruent evidence than others (they differ in their confirmation function).
```

We, therefore, hope to not only provide a rationale for preregistration for those who subscribe to a Bayesian philosophy of science but also a framework to navigate the complicated questions that arise in the practice of preregistration.

At the same time, approaching the evaluation of evidence using a Bayesian formalism is far from novel [e.g., @kuklaClinicalStatisticalTheory1990 @fiedlerWhatConstitutesStrong2017;@sprengerBayesianPhilosophyScience2019].
To our knowledge, it was not yet applied to the problem of preregistration.
However, @oberauerAddressingTheoryCrisis2019 made use of the formalism to model the relation between theory, hypothesis, and evidence.
In the context of this conceptualization, they discussed the usefulness of preregistration, though without applying the formalism there.
Most importantly, they are rather critical of the idea that preregistration has tangible benefits.
Instead, they prefer multiverse analyses but contend that those could be preregistered if one fancies it.
Their reasoning is based on two intuitions about what should *not* influence the evaluation of evidence: temporal order and the mental state of the originator.

> For one, they disregard the temporal order a bit too hastily, as it is a long-standing issue in Bayesian philosophy of science known as the "problem of old evidence" [@chiharaProblemsBayesianConfirmation1987].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On our opinion, they disregard the temporal order a bit too hastily, as it is a long-standing issue in Bayesian philosophy of science known as the "problem of old evidence" [@chiharaProblemsBayesianConfirmation1987].
```

Author: ```suggestion
In our opinion, they disregard the temporal order a bit too hastily, as it is a long-standing issue in Bayesian philosophy of science known as the "problem of old evidence" [@chiharaProblemsBayesianConfirmation1987].
```

> However, we agree that the information flow matters for preregistration, not the temporal order.

Reviewer 2: hmm... "information flow" does not seem like a well-defined concept :)

Author: ```suggestion
However, we agree that not the temporal order is decisive but if the researchers incorporated the information into the hypothesis the evidence is supposed to confirm.
```

For the other, we argue that the mental state of the originator does matter.
Suppose there are $k = 1, 2, \ldots, K$ ways to analyze data.
Where each $k$ has a $P(E_k | \neg H) > 0$.

> If they intend to try each way after another but happen to be "lucky" on the first try and stop, should we then apply $P(\neg E| \neg H) = P(\neg E_1 | \neg H)$ or $P(\neg E| \neg H) = \prod_{k=1}^K P(\neg E_k | \neg H)$?

Reviewer 2: I liek this example and agree with it conceptually, however, the formula you give only holds when E_1 ... E_k are independent, which is not the case normally?
So I assume you would write it this way?: (pls also check for latex rendering)
```suggestion
If they intend to try each way after another but happen to be "lucky" on the first try and stop, should we then apply $P(\neg E| \neg H) = P(\neg E_1 | \neg H)$ or $P(\neg E| \neg H) = P(\neg E_1 \land \ldots \land \neg E_k | \neg H)$?
```

To our knowledge, it was not yet applied to the problem of preregistration.
However, @oberauerAddressingTheoryCrisis2019 made use of the formalism to model the relation between theory, hypothesis, and evidence.
In the context of this conceptualization, they discussed the usefulness of preregistration, though without applying the formalism there.
Most importantly, they are rather critical of the idea that preregistration has tangible benefits.
Instead, they prefer multiverse analyses but contend that those could be preregistered if one fancies it.
Their reasoning is based on two intuitions about what should *not* influence the evaluation of evidence: temporal order and the mental state of the originator.
In our opinion, they disregard the temporal order a bit too hastily, as it is a long-standing issue in Bayesian philosophy of science known as the "problem of old evidence" [@chiharaProblemsBayesianConfirmation1987].
However, we agree that not the temporal order is decisive but if the researchers incorporated the information into the hypothesis the evidence is supposed to confirm.
For the other, we argue that the mental state of the originator does matter.

> Suppose there are $k = 1, 2, \ldots, K$ ways to analyze data.
> Where each $k$ has a $P(E_k | \neg H) > 0$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose there are $k = 1, 2, \ldots, K$ ways to analyze data, where each $k$ has a $P(E_k | \neg H) > 0$.
```

> If they intend to try each way after another but happen to be "lucky" on the first try and stop, should we then apply $P(\neg E| \neg H) = P(\neg E_1 | \neg H)$ or $P(\neg E| \neg H) = P(\neg E_1 \land \ldots \land \neg E_k | \neg H)$?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If they intend to try each way after another but happen to be "lucky" on the first try and stop, should we then apply $P(E| \neg H) = P(E_1 | \neg H)$ or $P(E| \neg H) = P(E_1 \lor \ldots \lor E_k | \neg H)$?
```

This runs counter to our definition of exploratory research having low theoretical risk.
Of course, we agree that low priors require more persuasive evidence; our disagreement, therefore, lies mainly in terminology.
They imagine discovery-oriented researchers to conduct experiments where they have low expectations that they obtain positive evidence ($.06 \cdot .8 + .94 \cdot .05 = 0.095$), but if they do, it raises the posterior significantly (from $.06$ to $.51$)
In our view, researchers who set out to explore a data set often find "something" (due to low $P(\neg E| \neg H)$); therefore, it should only slightly raise your posterior if they do.
On a substantive matter, we believe both kinds of research are common in psychology.
It is, therefore, mostly a disagreement on terminology.
This disagreement only highlights why using a mathematical framework to investigate such things is so useful and ultimately indispensable because we can clearly see where and how we differ in our reasoning.

We believe that our reasoning is quite similar to @hoflerMeansValuableExploration2022, who call for transparent exploration using preregistration.

> We could be surer of our agreement, if they had formulated their arguments within a mathematical framework, which would also have helped to dissolve an apparent conflict in their definitions of confirmation, exploration, and transparency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could be more sure of our agreement, if they had formulated their arguments within a mathematical framework, which would also have helped to dissolve an apparent conflict in their definitions of confirmation, exploration, and transparency.
```
